# Data Science Capstone (Arizona State University 2023)

Prediction and Clustering on Data from the National Basketball Association

1)	Predicting the quality of performance in the playoffs based on regular season performance.
2)	Analyzing the similarity in quality of performance in the draft combine and the NBA.

Being a passionate fan of the game of basketball, the purpose behind this project was to work with data from the National Basketball Association to build a model which predicts a player’s performance in the playoffs given their performance in the regular season. Having started this capstone in the midst of the 2023 NBA playoffs, it was fascinating to witness players having all-time great performances in key playoff moments, when they did not have a remarkable performance in the regular season. On the other hand, there are those players who perform consistently well in the regular season and carry on the same level of play to the playoffs. I’ve always been fascinated by players who ‘turn on’ in the big moments, where winning matters the most. This fascination fueled the curiosity behind my first research question (RQ1), which was to build a regressor to predict playoff performance based on a player’s regular season statistics. The first step towards approaching this question was to define ‘playoff performance’.
During an extensive literature review, a deep dive of ‘all-encompassing statistics’ was performed to identify one of them to use for the project. To put it simply, all-encompassing statistics in basketball are metrics which can evaluate a player’s performance with a single number. The all-encompassing stat chosen for this project is wins above replacement or WAR, which describes the number of wins a player contributes to their team if they were replaced with an average player. WAR data for this project was sourced from FiveThirtyEight – a website part of abc news, that is known for sports blogging using statistical analytics. The two regressors built as a part of RQ1 are trained to predict WAR for the playoffs given their regular season statistics as input. All the regular season data was sourced from the NBA statistics webpage using a ‘nba_api’ API client for ‘www.nba.com’. This python package makes it easy to access all regular season data for any given player using the function calls with the necessary parameters. A multiple linear regressor and a random forest regressor were built and trained on select features of regular season data based on the combination of features produced the highest R-Squared score. The random forest regressor performs substantially better on the training data, as it seems to do fit the more complex (and at times, non-linear) relationships between the independent and target variables. However, both models produce similar mean squared error, mean absolute error, and R-Squared scores (about 0.22 for the MLR and 0.27 for the RFR) on a hold-out/test dataset which consists of regular season stats from the latest 2022-23 season.
In the second part of this project (RQ2), I wanted to explore similarities in draft combine performance and rookie season performances in the NBA. The NBA draft combine is a showcase of upcoming NBA talent that spans over a few days before the NBA draft. The combine features tests of skill, athleticism, body measures, and level of play. Using the ‘nba_api’ package as well as RAPTOR data (another all-encompassing statistic from FiveThirtyEight), draft combine drill and anthropometric statistics were collected for all participants from the years 2014-2022. Additionally, their corresponding performance in their first season in the NBA was collected in the form of RAPTOR stats (describe their performance as a combination of box-score and player-tracking data). After collecting and cleaning the data, a K-Means Clustering approach is used to group similar performances in the draft as well as in the NBA. Clustering was performed in two different contexts to produce two different types of labels. The first type of clustering performed was on the draft statistics (similarity in performance amongst several features – wingspan, weight, height, etc. for anthropometrics and vertical jump height, lane agility, bench press, etc. for drills). The second set of labels were assigned based on clustering on offensive and defensive RAPTOR statistics from players’ first season in the NBA. Since this aspect of the project was analytical and not predictive, results can be viewed as plots, distributions, and insights, described in great detail in the analysis section of this project. In short, it is noticed that there does not seem to be a definitive relationship between players that perform similarly in the draft and players that have similar RAPTOR scores in their first season in the NBA.
This project certainly opens up pathways to further analysis and predictions by revealing insights into the relationships between different variables, and how their complexity can be captured more efficiently to produce more accurate models. For example, in RQ1 using a random forest regressor was a step-up to a multiple linear regressor, as it was able to model these relationships more accurately. I hope to continue to improve upon the results of this project, to build a more accurate predictor of playoff performance.
